Project: Data Modeling with Postgres

Introduction

A startup called Sparkify wants to analyze the data they've been collecting on songs and user activity on their new music streaming app. The analytics team is particularly interested in understanding what songs users are listening to. Currently, they don't have an easy way to query their data, which resides in a directory of JSON logs on user activity on the app, as well as a directory with JSON metadata on the songs in their app.

They'd like a data engineer to create a Postgres database with tables designed to optimize queries on song play analysis, and bring you on the project. Your role is to create a database schema and ETL pipeline for this analysis. You'll be able to test your database and ETL pipeline by running queries given to you by the analytics team from Sparkify and compare your results with their expected results.

Song Dataset

The first dataset is a subset of real data from the Million Song Dataset. Each file is in JSON format and contains metadata about a song and the artist of that song. The files are partitioned by the first three letters of each song's track ID. For example, here are filepaths to two files in this dataset.

song_data/A/B/C/TRABCEI128F424C983.json
song_data/A/A/B/TRAABJL12903CDCF1A.json
And below is an example of what a single song file, TRAABJL12903CDCF1A.json, looks like.

{"num_songs": 1, "artist_id": "ARJIE2Y1187B994AB7", "artist_latitude": null, "artist_longitude": null, "artist_location": "", "artist_name": "Line Renaud", "song_id": "SOUPIRU12A6D4FA1E1", "title": "Der Kleine Dompfaff", "duration": 152.92036, "year": 0}

Log Dataset

The second dataset consists of log files in JSON format generated by this event simulator based on the songs in the dataset above. These simulate activity logs from a music streaming app based on specified configurations.

The log files in the dataset you'll be working with are partitioned by year and month. For example, here are filepaths to two files in this dataset.

log_data/2018/11/2018-11-12-events.json
log_data/2018/11/2018-11-13-events.json
And below is an example of what the data in a log file, 2018-11-12-events.json, looks like.


If you would like to look at the JSON data within log_data files, you will need to create a pandas dataframe to read the data. Remember to first import JSON and pandas libraries.

df = pd.read_json(filepath, lines=True)

For example, df = pd.read_json('data/log_data/2018/11/2018-11-01-events.json', lines=True) would read the data file 2018-11-01-events.json.

Schema for Song Play Analysis

Using the song and log datasets, you'll need to create a star schema optimized for queries on song play analysis. This includes the following tables.

Fact Table

songplays - records in log data associated with song plays i.e. records with page NextSong
songplay_id, start_time, user_id, level, song_id, artist_id, session_id, location, user_agent

Dimension Tables

users - users in the app
user_id, first_name, last_name, gender, level

songs - songs in music database
song_id, title, artist_id, year, duration

artists - artists in music database
artist_id, name, location, latitude, longitude

time - timestamps of records in songplays broken down into specific units
start_time, hour, day, week, month, year, weekday


Conclusion:

Create and drop table queries: First, the scripts are made to create the tables as decribed above, the two tables song and Log
broken down to one fact table and four dimension tables. 

Testing the process in notebook, to make sure our code work and required testing are done in the process

Once, we are happy with the code,  I have created the ETL pipeline, that can run part of the main program.

Breaking down these tables has lots of cons
 - Data integrity: The integrity increases as the duplication of data is avoided mostly, so records updates became more effective
 - If we to query for a fewer data, we don't need to touch the full table, i.e. if just need the artist name, we can go the artist table and get the info, rather than quering a big table
 - space save, if we are dealing with a relational database, space is a huge challenge, but avoding duplilcates not only it increases the integrity but saves lots of space.
 - the ERD model will make it easier for analysts to query on the data to develop insights, use of the indexes will make the query more effective
 
How to run
The run the ETL process, we need to run the following processes in order
 - create_tables.py
 - etl.py

